edition of news feature a presentation
of the news department here at KPFK I'm
Corey Dubin your daily host here on news
feature today we want to deal with the
federal bureau of investigation and
their counterintelligence or COINTELPRO
program a program that was undertaken by
the FBI in the 1960s and early 1970s
that was designed to infiltrate collect
intelligence on and ultimately destroy
groups such as the Black Panther Party
the students for a Democratic Society
and other progressive and radical groups
that were operating in this country at
this time the reason COINTELPRO is in
the news again this week is the
evidentiary hearing of former Black
Panther deputy defense minister here in
Los Angeles Geronimo Pratt Pratt is
seeking a new hearing in his conviction
in 1972 of the so called tennis court
murder the defense through documents
obtained under the Freedom of
Information Act and other ways of
obtaining federal documents is trying to
prove that Pratt was singled out under
the COINTELPRO program joining us by
phone today is Donald freed author
playwright and investigator Don has
spent years looking at the CIA and the
intelligence community in this country
he wrote a book death in Washington
which was about the assassination of our
londo the telly a who was the ambassador
of the United States from Chile and Don
is extremely familiar with the Cohen
temporal program itself and FBI
activities in the late 1960s good
afternoon Don Don let's start the
program with your dogs in the background
let's start there are still people I
think that are not familiar what the
counterintelligence program or
COINTELPRO was really all about maybe
you could give us a little background on
that echoes down the corridors of the
60s and 70s was a continuation really of
earlier programs called common fell and
others all of them being cognate words
having to do with intelligence
comunism what was earlier called by the
FBI rabble-rousing bureau believe it or
not that was the term for earlier
versions of the National read squad that
the FBI became rabble-rousing list and
these indexes which which John the young
John edgar Hoover instigated for the
young Bureau of Investigation called the
BI then over the years the 24 30s the
40s
became in its generic descendancy
finally COINTELPRO it was the offspring
of decades of secret police the longest
in modern history by the way not very uh
certainly not dumb Gables or none of the
various tyrants or monsters of the 20th
century or the 19th century ever was
head of the secret place in any modern
nation-state as long as J Edgar Hoover
some fifty years about a quarter of the
length of time are of the existence of
our republic so you have in in
COINTELPRO the epitome the apotheosis of
the combination of a secret police
mentality and the bureaucratization that
modern technology could give to that
ideology Don let's look at how
COINTELPRO was used in the late 1960s
and early 70s against groups like the
Black Panther Party and the students for
a Democratic Society it was an indeed a
broad spectrum are including Southern
Christian Leadership Conference and and
double-a-c-p and when you look at the
spectrum of the COINTELPRO enemies list
you realize that it is not precise is
not really a simply anti-communist or
counter revolutionary um it is in its
essence anti-democratic and today your
focusing on the left wing of the
COINTELPRO hitlist but if you were to
look at the right wing of it it would be
surprising because it would involve
simply mainstream Democratic related
organizations but to focus on your
question today in this very important
case of Elbert Pratt
there was a claimed of order of battle
the United States was broken up into war
zones the Black Panthers were perceived
as in insurgency of the metaphor the
Huey P Newton had suggested in me from
the middle 60s on and which had been
greeted with a good deal of contempt by
certain intellectual circles on the left
that in fact the ghettos of America were
the equivalent of colonies in the third
world that the black liberation struggle
was an insurgency that the riots were
not riots but rebellions and revolts and
that the secret police programs were not
law enforcement but in fact
counterinsurgency and if you doubted you
EP Newton the Panther leadership which
included Elmer Pratt if you thought the
metaphor was preferment and based on
loose readings of France for non the
rest of the earth and the sort of
jackleg maoism implanted to the soulful
style to the ghetto you've only to look
at the the sober stunning boring and
deadly days of the FBI to realize that
it is precisely a counterinsurgency
model that the FBI set up and that's
what COINTELPRO was that's what it was a
domestic Phoenix program of a kind and
it involved of course every kind of
official terrorism up to an including
murder not murder and in the case of the
life incarceration of Elmer Pratt
you have as far as the secret police
could go now we've remained selective
somewhat surgical although it did not
seem that way to black people but and it
was successful in basically decapitating
the black liberation movement which had
been a same from the beginning it had
tied the Panthers down in courts across
the country in millions and millions of
dollars in bail except our energies it
planted informers it conducted every
filthy direct known the covert action
and finally when it had no other
alternative the secret police
assassinated the Fred Hamptons the
little Bobby Hutton's the George
Jackson's I did incarcerated Elmer Pratt
Don I'd like to look at some specifics
about how they operated you mentioned
infiltration murder we could see these
particular instances of course as
complete violations of constitutional
standards in this country and I'm
wondering about the operation of that in
terms of the direction was it mr. Hoover
and was the FBI putting out directives
clearly that these activities were to be
undertaken by the field offices yes
that's a good question
to study the decision-making process and
the Linguistics of power it is a
fascinating discussion um it people
should do it anyone who can read and
write should do a to really grasp the
libido are the secret play some of the
anti-democratic forces in the history of
this nation which the FBI represents and
when they would plant false information
or send letters which attempted to pit
groups against each other
the Karenga US organization against the
Black Panthers or the Black Panthers
against the Blackstone Rangers in
Chicago or nasty yes against the
Christian Leadership Conference and as
they tried to pit radical groups against
each other toward the end of civil war
and and internecine slaughter the
directives from the SOG which Hoover
referred to as the seat of government he
referred to his office in Washington as
the seat of government
so these SOG teletypes across the
country to the various bureaus would
would indicate of course back and forth
that Hoover and his henchmen to the
special agents in charge in the field
would would always spell out that this
was not to be traced to the bureau on
the sending of letters are the attempt
of the incessant use of sexpionage
that is attempting to use sex and rumors
of sex as especially to destroy the
movements which had many young people in
them who were sexually active and they
there was always the caveat and the
warning that the bureau not be involved
in my own case for instance with the
bureau cause to be drawn a picture of a
pig and this pig and this picture of the
pig was on a leaflet and there in very
crude type setting and what purported to
be ghetto english was a rambling
diatribe about freed was a government
agent of some kind and who would be
taken care of and it was signed all
power to the people
it was then passed out by the thousands
in the black ghettos of this country and
obviously its aim was to fold that if
something happened to me a white
supporter a white sociologist working
with the panthers if something should
happen to me the Panthers would of
course be blamed and thus two birds
would be killed with the same stone well
eventually these leaflets
I and other kinds of COINTELPRO the
devices appeared when the Church
Committee held hearings in the mid
seventies in Washington but the lawsuit
that came from this against the
government by the Panthers was never
able to come to trial the ACLU and other
groups were not able to support of the
case to come to trial if it had come to
trial we would have had the chance to
see FBI Special Agents sitting on the
stand
our talking about how they drew pictures
and forged letters in what they thought
was black ghetto English and the
shattering racism of this practice would
have perhaps been sobering to the
country but the Black Panther cases have
never against the government have never
come to term and it is perhaps only the
Geronimo Pratt case which can reopen the
can of worms that is quarto bro Donna
are you familiar of a list that was
submitted by then director Hoover called
the key black extremists list yes I am
and it's interesting to study the cable
traffic on Martin Luther King for
instance because there you have none of
the ambiguity surrounding Panther
leaders but they're the combination of
use of violence and sex ah reaches a
climax are in April 1968 and a
thoroughgoing study just leads
inevitably to the conclusion that the
FBI is involved in the murder of dr.
King that is something of course Don
that has been that many groups
investigators have attempted to prove
and of course too many North American
citizens I would say they believe that
the FBI was involved you mentioned some
of the cable traffic around dr. King
some of what we know about was some of
the letters about dr. King's so-called
sexual activity and other things about
dr. king that seemed to be originating
in Jay after Hoover's desk in his brain
in his brain which after all is only a
pornographic caricature of the American
mentality but it is an important one and
Hoover's obsession with sex all right
with the touching of the races and of
the sexes it provides a pathological
dimension that we have understood as a
function of fascism since any systematic
study began perhaps we'll go home right
and others and this psycho sexual
component to the police state mentality
and the secret police mentality is long
long been overlooked or by vulgar
Marxists I'm afraid that on the Left we
have combined vulgar Freudianism with
vulgar Marxism and it has not been a
very rich mixture and it is very
important I think to look again at what
lies behind the masculine protest as
it's sometimes called or the extreme
forms of male chauvinism that
characterized the wording and the
functioning of the secret place and why
their targets are inevitably associated
with dirt with filth with sexual
deviation with perversion and with
subversion and a sophisticated
understanding of sexual phobias and
political panic
I really think who leads one deeper into
how to understand um how to protect
ourselves for instance a group now is
preparing a conference in Los Angeles on
domestic terrorism we will have to ask
what the common denominator is between
the attacks on the abortion clinics for
instance which so much resemble
COINTELPRO boilerplate of your and the
attack the verbal counter assassination
that followed the physical assassination
of Professor Cooperman Don I covered the
Geronimo Pratt trial this week and it
was an interesting window if I can use
that expression in one instance I felt
like I was sitting in a courtroom Don in
the 1960s
watching trial lawyers cross-examine FBI
agents about COINTELPRO and setting up
and watching the FBI essentially
Stonewall the defense in Stonewall the
case and makes statements that were
obviously not based in reality
and contradictions that were incredible
yet then every now and then I'd be shook
out of that kind of time space and
realized it was 84 and what the FBI was
doing it in that courtroom indicated
that the same kind of things are
probably going on today and I'd like to
look a little at that I think you raise
a very important all right
not many people even on the left know
that grand juries are sitting around the
country secret grand juries and dealing
not only with the central american
situation in the churches in the
sanctuary movement but dealing with
ghetto organizations black organizations
and somehow the black dimension the most
militant revolutionary dimension of the
American military 'it has been
abstracted out and i give you as an
example the tremendous victory in the
ACLU case against the LAPD I don't think
it's widely appreciated in libertarian
circles and First Amendment circles that
the Michael zinzin and the Kappa a group
coalition against police abuse these
veterans of the black panther black
liberation movement who eventually form
the very
dedicated an impressive kappa group it
is violence against black people that
provided the context the environment and
the trigger for that huge LAPD suit that
the ACLU has won in in New Haven where
I've been part of a suit that just won a
million seven hundred and fifty thousand
dollars it's very similar to the LA suit
again but the reason I was in New Haven
was to cover the Black Panther trials
the ghosts of which you saw this week so
again the I think there was not
understood in the 60s and 70s or today
that the American movement for human
rights and justice the major term of the
dialectic of that movement is black and
I don't think that has been understood I
don't think it's appreciated and at the
alienation that that exists politically
perhaps is illuminated and ventilated a
bit when we look again as you did this
week and in your coverage you see you
have brought back to KPFK this afternoon
a discussion that is for most people
about a ghost but these are unlaid
revenants unlaid ghosts and the left
must come to terms with people who not
were just pushed or inconvenienced a
little bit in the 60s and 70s but who
were murdered
paralyzed sent to prison for life and by
your going into that courtroom and
bringing the news out I think you're
doing an extremely courageous and
unnecessary thing Don let's look at the
Reagan administration in the FBI today
the Reagan administration has of course
unleashed the Central Intelligence
Agency again throughout the world the
agency may well at least the Reagan
administration is willing to permit
domestic work by the CIA something that
clearly violates their charter
the FBI is very active again and we're
about to see the appointment of
nice as the chief law enforcement
officer in our country what does all
this mean for you down there you have it
when ed meese was in California with
then Governor Reagan he ran a secret
police apparatus whose targets were
black leadership Chicano lead leadership
and especially the farm workers movement
and student protests and student
leadership and from one end of this
state to the other
uh California had a grid and underground
secret police movement that wired this
state from tip to tip it tied in to
local sheriffs and police departments
and this was Mesa was in charge of the
whole thing and he it it also reached to
Washington to the Pentagon in a
operation called garden plot that was
the codename for it and which was a
subsidiary subsidiary of a larger
operation called cable splicer with
cable splicer and garden plot was a
California
Pentagon operation always remembering
that Berkeley was seen as a laboratory
for student protests and that Oakland
was seen as a laboratory for black
rebellion and that Cesar Chavez was seen
as a potential leader of a migrant
farmworker
revolution and if those farmworkers
could hook up with black workers and
black lump and proletariat and white
students in an anti-war movement then
you might have the predicate for a new
developing consciousness or Sensibility
well Ronald Reagan edwin meese mr. Clark
stirrer and others
acted and not just rhetorically when
Reagan said let's hold their feet to the
fire if they want a bloodbath let's get
it over with
etc know what was set up with ever
longer and others was a seek state
secret police operation that's who
Edmond Mies was he and Lowell Jensen
with his associate at the Department of
Justice simply organized the panther
hunting tamper tracking machine of
Northern California is they put into
play a counterinsurgency operation in
the Bay Area when you go back and look
at what happened in the Bay Area in this
state in the 60s and 70s and what
happened as the Panthers and the black
revolutionaries were moved from the
streets into the prisons as part of
these sweeps and drag Nets so that the
prisons then exploded
the explosion was taken off the streets
if you study the California prison
system the soil breaker as it's called
and the streets and the campuses and
they attempt to murder Cesar Chavez in
this state a you are reminded powerfully
of what California was from 1966 to 1974
of what the Reagan regime in California
really meant of who had me who is a
former army intelligence officer really
was and of how we had better prepare
ourselves to be very grown up in the
next four years Don with your wealth of
experience in dealing with what we would
call the police apparatus in this
society and and I think a growing
awareness that that never died it just
lessened its visibility and is of course
with us today what do you suggest Don to
pfk through speakers bureaus through
church groups through bringing the
anti-war and the civil rights movement
under the same roof that I really think
it's wrongheaded to say as we often say
we're only talking to each other we're
only talking to each other and we're
tired and we're dispirited I think that
basically misunderstands what happens in
groups groups talk to each other toward
the end of greater motivation that
greater motivation are reaches out
change takes place both visibly and
invisibly but the index of it is the
level of energy motivation clarity and
consciousness and I really think numbers
of people not only pooling their
creativity but pooling their money their
presence their physical visibility
whether it be in organizing around the
residential American refugee network
whether it be around ah the women's
clinics in short since we all have only
so much time energy and money we really
have to demand that the groups with
which we work that they reach out and
make liaison and some sort of united
front with other groups whose common
denominator is human rights and
therefore
upper class physicians are working
against nuclear war half to rub
shoulders ah with um let's say both
working women who are protecting an
abortion clinic or with minority people
or students who are involved in
attempting to stop a police brutality
there has to be a kind of a recognition
of natural allies and brought together
and when you have or a organization like
KPFK for instance work and all
the one roof then if KPFK and if other
groups that help some organization will
take leadership then we have to
alternative our energies because if ever
there was a time for a Popular Front it
is now against Ronald Reagan edwin meese
William Casey and as vicious a gang of
thugs as has ever been in power at one
time in a modern major industrial state
we've been talking with Donald freed
playwright author investigative
journalist who has looked at the police
apparatus in his country and been
attacked by that apparatus on many
occasions